# NCBI-Hackathons/ATACFlow
This pipeline performs ATAC Seq using Nextflow

This document describes the output produced by the pipeline. Most of the plots are taken from the MultiQC report, which summarises results at the end of the pipeline.

## Pipeline overview
The pipeline is built using [Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/)
and processes data using the following steps:

* [Sra-tools](#sra-tools) --version 2.8.2 - convert sra files to fastq files
* [Trim_Galore](#trim_galore) --version 0.4.4 -trimming adaptors and quality control
* [FastQC](#fastqc) --version v0.11.7 - read quality control
* [MultiQC](#multiqc) --version 1.5 - report, describing results of the whole pipeline
* [Bowtie2-build](#bowtie2-build) --version 2.3.0 -building reference genome
* [Bowtie2](#bowtie2) --version 2.3.0 - mapping reads to reference genome
* [Samtools](#samtools) --version 1.3.1 - manipulating alignments in the SAM files
* [Bedtools](#bedtools) --version 2.25.0 - enables genome arithmetic
* [Igvtools](#igvtools) --version 2.3.75 - for preprocessing data
* [Macs2](#macs2) --version 2.1.1.20160309 - finding peaks

## FastQC
[FastQC](http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/) gives general quality metrics about your reads. It provides information about the quality score distribution across your reads, the per base sequence content (%T/A/G/C). You get information about adapter contamination and other overrepresented sequences.

For further reading and documentation see the [FastQC help](http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/Help/).

**Output directory: `results/fastqc`**

* `sample_fastqc.html`
  * FastQC report, containing quality metrics for your untrimmed raw fastq files
* `zips/sample_fastqc.zip`
  * zip file containing the FastQC report, tab-delimited data file and plot images

## MultiQC
[MultiQC](http://multiqc.info) is a visualisation tool that generates a single HTML report summarising all samples in your project. Most of the pipeline QC results are visualised in the report and further statistics are available in within the report data directory.

**Output directory: `results/multiqc`**

* `Project_multiqc_report.html`
  * MultiQC report - a standalone HTML file that can be viewed in your web browser
* `Project_multiqc_data/`
  * Directory containing parsed statistics from the different tools used in the pipeline

For more information about how to use MultiQC reports, see http://multiqc.info


## TrimGalore

TrimGalore is used for removal of adapter contamination and trimming of low quality regions. TrimGalore uses Cutadapt for adapter trimming and runs FastQC after it finishes.

MultiQC reports the percentage of bases removed by TrimGalore in the General Statistics table, along with a line plot showing where reads were trimmed.

**Output directory: `results/trimgalore`**

Contains FastQ files with quality and adapter trimmed reads for each sample, along with a log file describing the trimming.

    sample_val_1.fq.gz, sample_val_2.fq.gz
        Trimmed FastQ data, reads 1 and 2.
    sample_val_1.fastq.gz_trimming_report.txt
        Trimming report (describes which parameters that were used)
    sample_val_1_fastqc.html
    sample_val_1_fastqc.zip
        FastQC report for trimmed reads

Single-end data will have slightly different file names and only one FastQ file per sample:

    sample_trimmed.fq.gz
        Trimmed FastQ data
    sample.fastq.gz_trimming_report.txt
        Trimming report (describes which parameters that were used)
    sample_trimmed_fastqc.html
    sample_trimmed_fastqc.zip
        FastQC report for trimmed reads


## bowtie2
[bowtie2](http://bowtie-bio.sf.net/bowtie2) is used for mapping adapter trimmed reads against the reference genome.

**Output directory: `results/bowtie2`**

## SAMtools

[SAMtools](https://github.com/samtools/samtools) is used for sorting and indexing the output BAM files from Bowtie2. In addition, the numbers of features are counted with the idxstats option.

**Output directory: `results/samtools`**

## Macs2
[macs2](https://github.com/taoliu/MACS) is a program for detecting regions of genomic enrichment. Though designed for ChIP-seq, it works just as well on ATAC-seq and other genome-wide enrichment assays that have narrow peaks. The main program in MACS2 is callpeak, and its options are described below.
As input, MACS2 takes the alignment files produced in the previous steps. However, it is important to remember that the read alignments indicate only a portion of the DNA fragments generated by the ATAC. Therefore, we must consider how we want MACS2 to interpret the alignments.

**Output directory: `result/macs2`** 

